KEP-3695: extend pod resource API to for DRA (#3738)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3695-pod-resources-for-dra/README.md

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

We propose an enhancement to the pod resource api to include resources allocated by [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation). We also propose to extend the API to be more friendly for consumption by CNI meta-plugins.
This KEP extends [2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments) and [2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources).

## Motivation

> The PodResources API is currently being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by device plugins as CNI arguments. One of the primary motivations for this KEP is to extend the PodResources API to allow these CNI plugins to reference resources allocated by DRA as well. Additional extensions to API will also make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node. Another use-case is to allow node monitoring agents to access information about allocated resources.

Reviewer: `Another use-case is to allow node monitoring agents to access information about allocated resources.`
this seems enabled by the basic functionality of the podresources API. I'd either remove this sentence or spend few words to detail how this KEP enables or improves this.

Author: I will clarify it allocated resources by DRA

### Goals

Enabling the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. DRA resource drivers will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Device](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the Pod resource API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs (just as it does for devices allocated by the device plugin today).

> 

Reviewer 2: We need to chat with sig-network about that in more detail. this approach for me looks like a hack rather than long term solution.

What we had in mind for DRA for network, is to enable DRA claim to be consumable as Pod level resource, like all network interfaces are. This way, the DRA driver can expose needed bits to Pod metadata that would be available in CNI, as well, DRA can be used as generic approach to request particular Network interface(s) based on specified properties, without relaying on some CNI side multiplexors.

Author: This is short term solution until multi-network will be supported in k8s.

Do you have design proposal or flow diagram of DRA for network? It is not clear to me how the pod metadata would be available in CNI. How it will work with multi-network? how do you link between the resource claim and the network?

why we will want to use DRA as generic approach to request particular Network interface?
It is mixing resources preparation with multi-network how to request network (which there is discussion https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3700)

Reviewer 3: I agree that we should consult with sig-network on whether this is the right approach long-term for CNI.

With that being said, I do believe this extension to the PodResources API has merit without the implications for CNI (e.g. for metrics).

@moshe010 can you turn this section into a bulleted list and add a goal above this one that outlines the metrics use case.

### Non-Goals

To enhance the GetAllocatableResources() call in the PodResources API to account for resources managed by DRA. With DRA there is no standard way to get the capacity, for example.

## Proposal

### Risks and Mitigations

This API is read-only, which removes a large class of risks. The aspects that we consider below are as follows:
- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA driver name, the DRA resource class, and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 3: Also, since this all seems closely tied to DRA (and not just CDI), I don't think the top-level field should be called `CDIDevices`, but rather something like `DynamicResources`  (with an embedded field for CDIDevices alongside the other fields mentioned here).

I'm open to an alternate name, but I don't think `CDIDevices` is appropriate here.

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA driver name, the DRA resource class, and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

Author: > We should be clear about what we mean by `DriverName` here. There are two pieces to a driver -- the `DriverName` refers to the name of the controller which does allocations, and the `KubeletPluginName` refers to the kubelet plugin which does the actual allocation of CDI devices.
> 
> At present they are one and the same (i.e. each controller is tied in a 1:1 relationship with its kubelet plugin).
> 
> However, we are in the process of decoupling these so that a single controller can trigger resource allocations from multiple kubelet plugins (which may or may not have the same name as the `DriverName` of the controller).
> 
> So which bit is actually important for you here? The name of the controller that did the allocation, or the name of the kubelet plugin that generated the CDI device list?

After rethinking this, because the resource class is cluster scope  I don't need the DriverName. The name of the resource class is  unique in the cluster so we can map the network attachment definition to the resource class. I removed the DriverName from the proto.

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA driver name, the DRA resource class, and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 4: Beware that the content of the resource class and thus the driver name there can change over the lifetime of a resource claim. We cannot prevent delete+recreate.

    rpc GetAllocatableResources(AllocatableResourcesRequest) returns (AllocatableResourcesResponse) {}
    rpc Get(GetPodResourcesRequest) returns (GetPodResourcesResponse) {}
}

message AllocatableResourcesRequest {}

// AllocatableResourcesResponses contains informations about all the devices known by the kubelet
message AllocatableResourcesResponse {
    repeated ContainerDevices devices = 1;
    repeated int64 cpu_ids = 2;
    repeated ContainerMemory memory = 3;
}

// ListPodResourcesRequest is the request made to the PodResourcesLister service
message ListPodResourcesRequest {}

// ListPodResourcesResponse is the response returned by List function
message ListPodResourcesResponse {
    repeated PodResources pod_resources = 1;
}

// PodResources contains information about the node resources assigned to a pod
message PodResources {
    string name = 1;
    string namespace = 2;
    repeated ContainerResources containers = 3;
}

// ContainerResources contains information about the resources assigned to a container
message ContainerResources {
    string name = 1;
    repeated ContainerDevices devices = 2;
    repeated int64 cpu_ids = 3;
    repeated ContainerMemory memory = 4;

>     repeated CDIDevices cdi_devices = 5;

Reviewer 3: Given my comment above, this field should be called `DynamicResources` (or whatever better name we come up with).

}

// ContainerMemory contains information about memory and hugepages assigned to a container
message ContainerMemory {
    string memory_type = 1;
    uint64 size = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// ContainerDevices contains information about the devices assigned to a container by device plugin
message ContainerDevices {
    string resource_name = 1;
    repeated string device_ids = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// Topology describes hardware topology of the resource
message TopologyInfo {
    repeated NUMANode nodes = 1;
}

// NUMA representation of NUMA node
message NUMANode {
    int64 ID = 1;
}

// CDIDevices contains information about the devices assigned to a container by DRA
message CDIDevices {

>     string driver_name = 1;

Reviewer 3: Given my comment above, we need clarity on whether this should be the name of the controller or the name of the kubelet plugin that generated the CDI devices (or maybe we need both?).

  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- [X] Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
- [X] e2e tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

- [ ] Gather feedback from consumers of the DRA feature and k8snetworkplumbingwg working group
- [ ] No major bugs reported in the previous cycle.

#### GA

- [ ] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [ ] Risks have been addressed.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

With gRPC the version is part of the service name.
Old versions and new versions should always be served and listened by the kubelet.

To a cluster admin upgrading to the newest API version, means upgrading Kubernetes to a newer version as well as upgrading the monitoring component.

To a vendor changes in the API should always be backwards compatible.

### Version Skew Strategy

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name: PodResourcesCDIDevices.

Reviewer: It could be surprising that the `Get` API availability is governed by a feature gate whose name doesn't hint back to `Get` in any way. This is probably a byproduct of the fact this KEP bundles together two enhancements both useful for CNI metaplugins but pretty indpendent with each other. I'd ask for directions to PRReviewers or approvers, as I can think of any good solution here.

Reviewer 5: Good point, I think it would probably be more apt to have another feature gate to guard the enablement/disablement of the `Get` endpoint. Agree that PRR reviewers should be able to provide input here.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, we should have 2 separate feature gates here.

>   - Feature gate name: PodResourcesCDIDevices.

Reviewer 3: Given my comments above, this should be renamed `PodResourcesDynamicResources` (or something better).

  - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet, 3rd party consumers.

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes, through feature gates.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The API becomes available again. The API is stateless, so no recovery is needed, clients can just consume the data.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

e2e test will demonstrate that when the feature gate is disabled, the API returns the appropriate error code.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Kubelet may fail to start. The new API may report inconsistent data, or may cause the kubelet to crash.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get` - but only with feature gate enabled. Otherwise the API will always return a known error, giving a false negative signal.

Reviewer: Arguably the known error can however allow admins/users to distinguish between real error and just API disabled. I'd try to convey that in the text. (or remove the reference to the false negative)

Author: removed the reference to the false negative

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

We propose an enhancement to the pod resource api to include resources allocated by [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation). We also propose to extend the API to be more friendly for consumption by CNI meta-plugins.

> This kep is extends [2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments) and [2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This KEP extends [2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments) and [2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources).
```

## Motivation

> The pod resource API is currently being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by Device Plugin as CNI arguments. The motivation is to allow the API to be used for resources allocated by DRA. Additionally, the proposed API will make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access the resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node. Another use-case is to allow node monitoring agents to access information about allocated resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The PodResources API is currently being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by device plugins as CNI arguments. One of the primary motivations for this KEP is to extend the PodResources API to allow these CNI plugins to reference resources allocated by DRA as well. Additional extensions to the API will also make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node. Another use-case is to allow node monitoring agents to access information about allocated resources.
```

### Goals

> Enabling the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. The DRA will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Device](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the Pod resource API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enabling the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. DRA resource drivers will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Device](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the Pod resource API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs (just as it does for devices allocated by the device plugin today).
```

### Non-Goals

To enhance pod resource API GetAllocatableResources for resources that managed by DRA. With DRA there is not standard

> way to get resource captivity.

Reviewer: non-blocking: I understand we can't provide something in turn DRA is not providing, but making the API more irregular makes me pause. Can we try to list options here to sketch some plans for the future? It would also be nice to spend few lines to explain why DRA can't provide this information.

Author: maybe this issue of  common way to get resource captivity with DRA should be tracked as separate issue? 

@klueska maybe we can standardize the nodeallocationstates CRD https://gitlab.com/nvidia/cloud-native/k8s-dra-driver/-/blob/main/deployments/static/crds/gpu.resource.nvidia.com_nodeallocationstates.yaml as CRD for the DRA kubelet plugin?

Reviewer 3: Not sure how we would (or even could) provide Capacity or Allocatable for DRA managed resources.

To answer your question directly, I don't think it's reasonable to assume there will be a standard representation for each resource managed by a DRA resource driver. It's not even required that a CRD be used for this purpose, let alone adhere to a specific format. 

Besides that, the notion of a "count" for a DRA managed resource is itself not well defined since each resource that gets allocated can a take drastically different form depending on what ClaimParameter objects are used to request them.

> To enhance pod resource API GetAllocatableResources for resources that managed by DRA. With DRA there is not standard
> way to get resource captivity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enhance the GetAllocatableResources() call in the PodResources API to account for resources managed by DRA. With DRA there is no standard way to get the capacity, for example.
```

- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA driver name, the DRA resource class, and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

>  Additionally, we propose adding a Get method to the existing gRPC service to allow querying specific pods for their allocated resources.

Reviewer 5: Nice, This is a nice addition to the API!

message PodResources {
    string name = 1;
    string namespace = 2;
    repeated ContainerResources containers = 3;
}

// ContainerResources contains information about the resources assigned to a container
message ContainerResources {
    string name = 1;
    repeated ContainerDevices devices = 2;
    repeated int64 cpu_ids = 3;
    repeated ContainerMemory memory = 4;
    repeated DynamicResources dynamic_resources = 5;
}

// ContainerMemory contains information about memory and hugepages assigned to a container
message ContainerMemory {
    string memory_type = 1;
    uint64 size = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// ContainerDevices contains information about the devices assigned to a container by device plugin
message ContainerDevices {
    string resource_name = 1;
    repeated string device_ids = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// Topology describes hardware topology of the resource
message TopologyInfo {
    repeated NUMANode nodes = 1;
}

// NUMA representation of NUMA node
message NUMANode {
    int64 ID = 1;
}

// DynamicResources contains information about the devices assigned to a container by DRA

> message DynamicResources {

Reviewer 3: this should be singular

Author: done

>     string resource_class = 1;

Reviewer 3: this can probably just be `class` since the type has `Resource` in the name

Reviewer 3: I also think we should include the claim name here. I know you don't have a use case for it yet, but I think it will be useful for tracking how devices are spread around.

Author: done

    repeated string cdi_devices = 2;
}

// GetPodResourcesRequest contains information about the pod
message GetPodResourcesRequest {
    string name = 1;
    string namespace = 2;
}

// GetPodResourcesResponse contains information about the pod the devices
message GetPodResourcesResponse {
    PodResources pod_resources = 1;
}

```

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/apis/podresources`: `01-24-2023` - `61.5%`

##### Integration tests

 These cases will be added in the existing integration tests:
  - Feature gate enable/disable tests.
  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

##### e2e tests

These cases will be added in the existing e2e tests:
  - Feature gate enable/disable tests.
  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- [X] Feature implemented behind a feature flag.

> - [X] e2e tests completed and enabled.

Author: it a mistake I remove it

Yes, through feature gates.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The API becomes available again. The API is stateless, so no recovery is needed, clients can just consume the data.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

e2e test will demonstrate that when the feature gate is disabled, the API returns the appropriate error code.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Kubelet may fail to start. The new API may report inconsistent data, or may cause the kubelet to crash.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

`pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get` - but only with feature gate enabled. Otherwise the API will always return a known error, giving a false negative signal.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

Not Applicable.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

> Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_listi` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get` metric exposed by the kubelet.

Author: yes the plan is to add pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get and pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get

### Non-Goals

To enhance the GetAllocatableResources() call in the PodResources API to account for resources managed by DRA. With DRA there is no standard way to get the capacity, for example.

## Proposal

### Risks and Mitigations

This API is read-only, which removes a large class of risks. The aspects that we consider below are as follows:
- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA driver name, the DRA resource class, and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 3: Please update this text, now that `DriverName` has been removed from the struct and `ClaimName` has been added.

    rpc GetAllocatableResources(AllocatableResourcesRequest) returns (AllocatableResourcesResponse) {}
    rpc Get(GetPodResourcesRequest) returns (GetPodResourcesResponse) {}
}

message AllocatableResourcesRequest {}

// AllocatableResourcesResponses contains informations about all the devices known by the kubelet
message AllocatableResourcesResponse {
    repeated ContainerDevices devices = 1;
    repeated int64 cpu_ids = 2;
    repeated ContainerMemory memory = 3;
}

// ListPodResourcesRequest is the request made to the PodResourcesLister service
message ListPodResourcesRequest {}

// ListPodResourcesResponse is the response returned by List function
message ListPodResourcesResponse {
    repeated PodResources pod_resources = 1;
}

// PodResources contains information about the node resources assigned to a pod
message PodResources {
    string name = 1;
    string namespace = 2;
    repeated ContainerResources containers = 3;
}

// ContainerResources contains information about the resources assigned to a container
message ContainerResources {
    string name = 1;
    repeated ContainerDevices devices = 2;
    repeated int64 cpu_ids = 3;
    repeated ContainerMemory memory = 4;

>     repeated DynamicResource dynamic_resource = 5;

Reviewer 3: the field name should be `dynamic_resources`

// ContainerMemory contains information about memory and hugepages assigned to a container
message ContainerMemory {
    string memory_type = 1;
    uint64 size = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// ContainerDevices contains information about the devices assigned to a container by device plugin
message ContainerDevices {
    string resource_name = 1;
    repeated string device_ids = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// Topology describes hardware topology of the resource
message TopologyInfo {
    repeated NUMANode nodes = 1;
}

// NUMA representation of NUMA node
message NUMANode {
    int64 ID = 1;
}

// DynamicResource contains information about the devices assigned to a container by DRA
message DynamicResource {
    string class_name = 1;
    string claim_name = 2;

>     repeated string cdi_devices = 3;

Reviewer 3: They currently do not, but its' not unheard of that they may have some amount of metadata (including but not limited to Topology information attached to them) attached to them in the future. Therefore, it may make sense to wrap this in a `CDIDevice` message where the only field currently is `name`.

It's exactly what we've done for our CRI extension so it would have the added benefit of being symmetrical with that:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3731/files

>     repeated string cdi_devices = 3;

Reviewer 3: @moshe010 Can you update to wrap these in a CDIDevice type with a name field?

>     repeated string cdi_devices = 3;

Reviewer: Adding metadata to expose, among other things, topology info, is fine by me. Strictly speaking not alpha-blocking but adding the CDIDevice type as suggested is needed (this way we can add fields in a compatible way, changing type later from string to CDIDevice will break compat.)

> message DynamicResource {

Reviewer 3: @swatisehgal @ffromani are you OK with this new name that I proposed?

Reviewer: Yes, I think it's clear enough given the context, thanks.

>     string claim_name = 2;

Reviewer 3: What is the difference between `class` and `class_name`?  My proposal from before was to have `class_name` and add `claim_name` in here. I can foresee cases where one would be interested in knowing the full set of CDIDevices allocated for a given claim. Moreover, just having the ResourceClassName suffices to map a set of CDI devices to a specific resource type (when there is a 1:1 mapping), but if someone defines a "meta" ResourceClass to allocate resources of many different types, then the only way to dig down to understand why a particular set of CDI devices is associated with that resource class is to also know what ResourceClaim they were allocated as part of.

  - Feature gate enable/disable tests.
  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- [ ] Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
- [ ] e2e tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

- [ ] Gather feedback from consumers of the DRA feature and k8snetworkplumbingwg working group
- [ ] No major bugs reported in the previous cycle.

#### GA

- [ ] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [ ] Risks have been addressed.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

With gRPC the version is part of the service name.
Old versions and new versions should always be served and listened by the kubelet.

To a cluster admin upgrading to the newest API version, means upgrading Kubernetes to a newer version as well as upgrading the monitoring component.

To a vendor changes in the API should always be backwards compatible.

### Version Skew Strategy

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

> - [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer 3: As mentioned in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3738#issuecomment-1416186748, I think we should additionally gate any code related to `DynamicResources` with the `DynamicResourceAllocationFeatureGate` (or whatever it is called).

Please also update in kep.yaml

This does not need to be true for the new `Get()` method.

Author: added

### Non-Goals

To enhance the GetAllocatableResources() call in the PodResources API to account for resources managed by DRA. With DRA there is no standard way to get the capacity, for example.

## Proposal

### Risks and Mitigations

This API is read-only, which removes a large class of risks. The aspects that we consider below are as follows:
- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the CDIDevices field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA resource class, the DRA resource claim and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver. It's important to note that this proposal focuses on retrieving CDI devices allocated by DRA. Other mechanisms that may utilize CDI, such as device plugin, are not included in the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer 3: This paragraph still does not reflect the state of the code below. For example, there is no  `CDIDevices` field being added to the `ContainerResources` message anymore. Please proofread and update as appropriate to reflect the new state of the proposal.

- [ ] Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
- [ ] e2e tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

- [ ] Gather feedback from consumers of the DRA feature and k8snetworkplumbingwg working group
- [ ] No major bugs reported in the previous cycle.

#### GA

- [ ] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [ ] Risks have been addressed.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

With gRPC the version is part of the service name.
Old versions and new versions should always be served and listened by the kubelet.

To a cluster admin upgrading to the newest API version, means upgrading Kubernetes to a newer version as well as upgrading the monitoring component.

To a vendor changes in the API should always be backwards compatible.

### Version Skew Strategy

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name for retriving resources allocated by DRA: `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources`.

>   - Feature gate name for Get method: `PodResourcesGet`. In case `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources`

Reviewer 3: As I mentioned in my comment here https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3738#discussion_r1096531525, I don't think we should gate the `Get()` call by the `DynamicResourceAllocation` feature gate, only the code relevant for the `PodResourcesDynamicResources` additions.

Looking more closely, it looks like maybe this is a copy-paste error since I assume the `PodResourcesGet` method should actually be gated by the `PodResourcesGet` feature gate and not the `PodResourcesDynamicResources` feature gate anyway.

Author: I added the "In case `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources`" part to emphasis that in case
the 3 features gate are enabled PodResourcesGet  , DynamicResourceAllocation  and  PodResourcesDynamicResources the Get call will return the resources allocated by DRA as well. of course If we just enable PodResourcesGet it should return without DRA resources even if we enable  PodResourcesGet  , DynamicResourceAllocation is should return without DRA resources.  Is my understanding correct?

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> We propose an enhancement to the pod resource api to include resources allocated by [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation). We also propose to extend the API to be more friendly for consumption by CNI meta-plugins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We propose an enhancement to the PodResources API to include resources allocated by [Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA)](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation). We also propose to extend the API to be more friendly for consumption by CNI meta-plugins.
```

This KEP extends [2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments) and [2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources).

## Motivation

> One of the primary motivations for this KEP is to extend the PodResources API to allow node monitoring agents to access information about allocated resources by DRA. The PodResources API is also being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by device plugins as CNI arguments. This extension can also be used to allow these CNI plugins to reference resources allocated by DRA as well. Additional extensions to API will also make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the primary motivations for this KEP is to extend the PodResources API to allow node monitoring agents to access information about resources allocated by DRA. The PodResources API is also being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by device plugins as CNI arguments. This extension can be used to allow these CNI plugins to reference resources allocated by DRA as well. Additional extensions to the API will also make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node.
```

### Goals

> - To allow node monitoring agents to know the alloacted DRA resources for Pods on a node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- To allow node monitoring agents to know the allocated DRA resources for Pods on a node.
```

> - Enabling the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. DRA resource drivers will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Device](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the Pod resource API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs (just as it does for devices allocated by the device plugin today).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- To allow the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. DRA resource drivers will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Devices](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the PodResources API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id of these CDI Devices as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs (just as it does for devices allocated by the device plugin today).
```

### Non-Goals

To enhance the GetAllocatableResources() call in the PodResources API to account for resources managed by DRA. With DRA there is no standard way to get the capacity, for example.

## Proposal

### Risks and Mitigations

This API is read-only, which removes a large class of risks. The aspects that we consider below are as follows:
- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

> Our proposal is to extend the existing pod resources gRPC service of the Kubelet by adding the DynamicResource field to the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA resource class, the DRA resource claim and a list of CDI Devices allocated by that DRA driver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our proposal is to extend the existing PodResources gRPC service of the Kubelet with a repeated DynamicResource field in the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA resource class, the DRA resource claim and a list of CDI Devices allocated by a DRA driver.
```

    repeated DynamicResource dynamic_resources = 5;
}

// ContainerMemory contains information about memory and hugepages assigned to a container
message ContainerMemory {
    string memory_type = 1;
    uint64 size = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// ContainerDevices contains information about the devices assigned to a container by device plugin
message ContainerDevices {
    string resource_name = 1;
    repeated string device_ids = 2;
    TopologyInfo topology = 3;
}

// Topology describes hardware topology of the resource
message TopologyInfo {
    repeated NUMANode nodes = 1;
}

// NUMA representation of NUMA node
message NUMANode {
    int64 ID = 1;
}

// DynamicResource contains information about the devices assigned to a container by DRA
message DynamicResource {
    string class_name = 1;
    string claim_name = 2;
    repeated string cdi_devices = 3;
}

// GetPodResourcesRequest contains information about the pod
message GetPodResourcesRequest {
    string name = 1;
    string namespace = 2;
}

// GetPodResourcesResponse contains information about the pod the devices
message GetPodResourcesResponse {
    PodResources pod_resources = 1;
}

> 

Reviewer 3: nit: remove newline

- [ ] No major bugs reported in the previous cycle.

#### GA

- [ ] Allowing time for feedback (1 year).
- [ ] Risks have been addressed.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

With gRPC the version is part of the service name.
Old versions and new versions should always be served and listened by the kubelet.

To a cluster admin upgrading to the newest API version, means upgrading Kubernetes to a newer version as well as upgrading the monitoring component.

To a vendor changes in the API should always be backwards compatible.

### Version Skew Strategy

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name for retrieving resources allocated by DRA: `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources`.
  - Feature gate name for Get method: `PodResourcesGet`. In case `DynamicResourceAllocation` or the `PodResourcesDynamicResources`

>     are disabled and `PodResourcesGet` is enabled the Get will retrieve resources allocated by device plugin, memory and cpus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    are disabled and `PodResourcesGet` is enabled, the Get method will retrieve resources allocated by device plugins, memory and cpus (but omit those allocated by DRA resource drivers).
```

>     In case `PodResourcesGet`, `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources` are enabled the Get method will retrieve

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In case `PodResourcesGet`, `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources` are all enabled, the Get method will
```

>     also the resources allocated by DRA.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    also retrieve resources allocated via DRA.
```

### Dependencies

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No.

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No. Feature is out of existing any paths in kubelet.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

DDOSing the API can lead to resource exhaustion.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

N/A.

###### What are other known failure modes?

> The API will always return a well-known error. In normal operation, the API is expected to never return error and always return a valid response, because it utilizes internal kubelet data which is always available. Bugs may lead to the API to return unexpected errors, or to return inconsistent data. Consumers of the API should treat unexpected errors as bugs of this API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The API will always return a well-known error. In normal operation, the API is expected to never return an error and always return a valid response, because it utilizes internal kubelet data which is always available. Bugs may cause the API to return unexpected errors, or to return inconsistent data. Consumers of the API should treat unexpected errors as bugs of this API.
```

- What are the risks associated with the API service itself?
- What are the risks associated with the data itself?

| Risk                                                      | Impact        | Mitigation |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------- |
| Too many requests risk impacting the kubelet performances | High          | Implement rate limiting and or passive caching, follow best practices for gRPC resource management. |
| Improper access to the data | Low | Server is listening on a root owned unix socket. This can be limited with proper pod security policies. |

## Design Details

### Proposed API

Our proposal is to extend the existing PodResources gRPC service of the Kubelet with a repeated DynamicResource field in the ContainerResources message. This new field will contain information about the DRA resource class, the DRA resource claim and a list of CDI Devices allocated by a DRA driver.
Additionally, we propose adding a Get method to the existing gRPC service to allow querying specific pods for their allocated resources.

> The extended interface is shown in proto below:

Reviewer 6: I understand the proposed API is read-only and mainly for the monitoring, but not sure the entire flow. May I have a couple of questions answered before approving this KEP:

1) We are using polling here. But what if DRA driver is dead, is the pod using the resource continue running? How to make sure the stats up to date?
2) DRA might be deallocated on the node, how often kubelet to issue Get() methods to reconsolidate the status?
3) Do we need a registration logic with Kubelet? 

I guess some of the questions might be discussed in a separate KEP, but hope we have the answers to those high level questions. Thanks!

Reviewer 3: **For (1):**
I guess you could think of it as polling, but the PodResources API is really more of an on-demand API that goes and gets the information it needs at the time it is requested. Nothing is cached as part of the API itself. The various components that hold the information (CPUManager, DeviceManager, etc) may cache this information, but the API doesn't "store" this information anywhere by itself.

In the case of the DRA manager, the information required to populate the new fields in the PodResources API is all cached in an in-memory store for each container that get launched. However, unlike the CPUManager and DeviceManager, this information is **not** persisted / checkpointed by the DRA manager itself. It **is** idempotently queriable from each DRA driver though. Meaning that the in-memory cache can be used to populate the API if the information is available, otherwise the cache can be filled by querying the DRA driver and then pushed up to the API as needed.

In response to this specific question: "But what if DRA driver is dead, is the pod using the resource continue running?"

The lifetime of a pod is not (necessarily) tied to the "readiness" of the DRA drivers that manage its resource claims. The only time a pod is blocked from deletion by a claim not being deleted (possibly because the DRA driver managing it is down) is if it is the last pod referencing that claim.

So I think what you are asking is "If a pod is running, but I can't communicate with one of the DRA drivers to query its list of DynamicResources (and this information is not available in the DRA managers in-memory cache), what do I do? Do I omit this information? Do I return an error?, etc."

Does this accurately reflect what you are trying to ask?

**For (2):**
What do you mean by "DRA might be deallocated on the node"? Do you mean the resources associated with a specific DRA driver might be deallocated on a node? And the question is how often the kubelet will need to consult with the DRA driver to refresh whatever information it may have about these resources? I think I answered this in my response to (1) when talking about the in-memory cache of the DRA manager and it ability to idempotently retrieve any missing information from the DRA driver.

The `Get()` call you refer to is something _exposed_ by the kubelet (not something the kubelet calls itself), so I assume you actually meant `NodePrepareResources()` (which is the idempotent call a kubelet can make against a DRA driver to get the list of CDI devices associated with a claim).

**For (3):**
What are you proposing should have registration logic with the kubelet? DRA resource drivers already do register with the kubelet (so it can make calls against them to Prepare/Unprepare resources). I think I need more context here to answer the question properly.

Reviewer 3: @dchen1107
I have updated the `Proposed API` section with more details that hopefully address your comments / concerns. PTAL

https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3738/files#diff-190ad7c104ab2cace0e7696b41212380fa0825a6b5203ca027af4137c342e487R95

Reviewer 6: @klueska Thanks for the detailed response.

You answered my questions. I tried to figure out how idempotent the behavior is since DRA is dynamic, the the status how persistent and consistent over the kubelet and / or DRA driver restarts. Even we might still have the inconsistency over the restart, but it is expected to some extent. I am accepting it for now. 

Also the KEP heavily depends on the DRA, but KEP doesn't include a high level component diagram capturing the dependencies and interfaces. It assumes the reviewers have all information. My original wish is to answer my questions, we could address the issue for the future readers. I guess I didn't state it clearly. I am ok with it for now.

Reviewer 3: No problem. They were important questions to ask.

Regarding:
> Even we might still have the inconsistency over the restart, but it is expected to some extent.

I don’t think we will have any inconstancies. The PoResources API is provided by the kubelet itself, so if it is down the API is inaccessible anyway. And once it comes back up it will reconcile all of the info it needs before it starts serving the API again.

Reviewer 7: will there be any race if API is called too early before everything got registered?

Reviewer 7: As for plugins not responding - there will be no partial results, correct? Either all known information is returned or an error. So one plugin can be a "noisy" neighbor for the API. Should this be added as a risk?

Reviewer 3: > will there be any race if API is called too early before everything got registered?

There shouldn't be. The set of CDI devices to allocate to a container is pulled from the various DRA plugins *before* a container is ever created. Either all plugins successfully allocate devices (thus populating the cache) and the container eventually gets created / starts running, or some plugin fails and the container start fails as well.  Meaning only containers whose cached CDI device info is complete will ever be created and thus accessible through the API.

> As for plugins not responding - there will be no partial results, correct? Either all known information is returned or an error. So one plugin can be a "noisy" neighbor for the API. Should this be added as a risk?

That shouldn't matter. If a plugin does not respond, then the container will never be started and thus not something queriable through the PodResources API.

To a cluster admin upgrading to the newest API version, means upgrading Kubernetes to a newer version as well as upgrading the monitoring component.

To a vendor changes in the API should always be backwards compatible.

### Version Skew Strategy

Kubelet will always be backwards compatible, so going forward existing plugins are not expected to break.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire
### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name for retrieving resources allocated by DRA: `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources`.
  - Feature gate name for Get method: `PodResourcesGet`. In case `DynamicResourceAllocation` or the `PodResourcesDynamicResources`
    are disabled and `PodResourcesGet` is enabled, the Get method will retrieve resources allocated by device plugins, memory and cpus (but omit those allocated by DRA resource drivers).
    In case `PodResourcesGet`, `DynamicResourceAllocation` and `PodResourcesDynamicResources` are all enabled, the Get method will also retrieve the resources allocated via DRA.

>   - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet, 3rd party consumers.

Reviewer 8: Would you mind state clear on 
1. which FG is reused from existing and which is proposed to be added. 
2. For each feature gate, which part it tries to gate?
3. Component depending on each feature gate separately?

Author: I update the kep to be clearer on the feature gates.

-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name:
  - Other field:
- [X] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: check the kubelet metric `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_total`, `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get`.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

N/A.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [X ] Metrics
  - Metric name:  `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_total`, `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get`.
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

As part of this feature enhancement, per-API-endpoint resources metrics are being added; to observe this feature the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` metric should be used. We will add `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get` error counter.

### Dependencies

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

> No.

Reviewer 8: Does it require DRA working?

Reviewer 3: It requires DRA to be available, but DRA is not a service (it is something built into the kubelet / default scheduler). Simply ensuring that the DRA feature gate is enabled is enough to ensure that DRA is available, so I tend to agree that this does _not_ depend on any services running in the cluster (as stated currently).

Author: I updated this similar to what was written in DRA kep https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation/README.md#dependencies

This KEP extends [2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2043-pod-resource-concrete-assigments) and [2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources).

## Motivation

One of the primary motivations for this KEP is to extend the PodResources API to allow node monitoring agents to access information about resources allocated by DRA. The PodResources API is also being used by CNI meta-plugins like [multus](https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/multus-cni) and [DANM](https://github.com/nokia/danm) to add resources allocated by device plugins as CNI arguments. This extension can be used to allow these CNI plugins to reference resources allocated by DRA as well. Additional extensions to the API will also make it easier for CNI meta-plugins to access resources allocated to a specific pod, rather than having to filter through resources for all pods on the node.

### Goals

- To allow node monitoring agents to know the allocated DRA resources for Pods on a node.

> - To allow the DRA feature to work with CNIs that require complex network devices such as RDMA. DRA resource drivers will allocate the resources, and the meta-plugin will read the allocated [CDI Devices](https://github.com/container-orchestrated-devices/container-device-interface) using the PodResources API. The meta-plugin will then inject the device-id of these CDI Devices as CNI arguments and invoke other CNIs (just as it does for devices allocated by the device plugin today).

Reviewer 9: This approach was not discussed in SIG Network and WG Multinetwork forums AFAIK, it will be better to involve all the stakeholders in these discussions to be able to get a uniform solution.

The recent developments and consensus for the Networking extension with DRA are described in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4861

driver that injected them -- i.e. once a DRA driver allocates a set of CDI
devices to a container, that container will have full access to those devices
for its entire lifetime (even if the DRA driver that injected them temporarily
goes offline). In this way, the in-memory cache maintained by the `DRAManager`
will always have the most up-to-date information for all running containers (so
long as checkpointing is added as described to repopulate it across kubelet
restarts).

##### Unit tests

- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/apis/podresources`: `01-24-2023` - `61.5%`

##### Integration tests

 These cases will be added in the existing integration tests:
  - Feature gate enable/disable tests.
  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

##### e2e tests

These cases will be added in the existing e2e tests:
  - Feature gate enable/disable tests.
  - Get API work with DRA and device plugin.
  - List API work with DRA and Device plugin.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- [ ] Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
- [ ] e2e tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

> - [ ] Gather feedback from consumers of the DRA feature and k8snetworkplumbingwg working group

Reviewer 9: and SIG Network

The API becomes available again. The API is stateless, so no recovery is needed, clients can just consume the data.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

e2e test will demonstrate that when the feature gate is disabled, the API returns the appropriate error code.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

Kubelet may fail to start. The new API may report inconsistent data, or may cause the kubelet to crash.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

`pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get` - but only with feature gate `PodResourcesGet` enabled. Otherwise the API will always return a known error.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

Not Applicable.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

Look at the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get` metric exposed by the kubelet.

> ###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Reviewer 10: "this instance" is referring to a specific use of a resource. in this case, the feature isn't really controlled by a user defined resource - it's either on or off for all instances, so you probably don't really need to answer this question. But a reasonable answer would be to call the API for the pod in question and see the result - that is aligned with the spirit of the question and what a user might do to check if it's working for them while troubleshooting.

<!--
For instance, if this is a pod-related feature, it should be possible to determine if the feature is functioning properly
for each individual pod.
Pick one more of these and delete the rest.
Please describe all items visible to end users below with sufficient detail so that they can verify correct enablement
and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason:
- [ ] API .status
  - Condition name:
  - Other field:

> - [X] Other (treat as last resort)

Reviewer 10: Metrics are more for the operator, not an end user, and therefore make sense as an answer to the *previous* question (which you gave). See comment above for a better answer to *this* question.

  - Details: check the kubelet metric `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_total`, `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get`.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

> N/A.

Reviewer 10: You don't need these for alpha but eventually should should be able to say something here.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [X ] Metrics
  - Metric name:  `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_total`, `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get`.
  - Components exposing the metric: kubelet

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

> As part of this feature enhancement, per-API-endpoint resources metrics are being added; to observe this feature the `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_get` and `pod_resources_endpoint_requests_list` metric should be used. We will add `pod_resources_endpoint_errors_get` error counter.

Reviewer 10: Would a latency metric be useful? Could gathering this data from various external sources take a long time?

Author: The information is cached in the DRAManager and the PodResources API just pull it from the cache. So I don't see value for a latency metric.
